# Introduction

The regulatory networks that determine cell and tissue identity are robust, yet
remarkably flexible. Transcription factors (TFs) control the expression of genes
by binding to their cognate DNA sequences, TF motifs, in cis-regulatory
elements. To understand how genetic variation affects binding and to elucidate
the role of TFs in regulatory networks we need to be able to accurately model
binding of TFs to the DNA sequence.

The most widely adopted representation of TF binding is the position frequency
matrix (PFM). This matrix, a TF motif, contains (normalized) frequencies of each
nucleotide at each position in a collection of aligned binding sites. These PFMs
can be derived from high-throughput experiments such as ChIP-sequencing,
HT-SELEX or Protein Binding Microarrays (PBMs). Through straightforward transformations PFMs can be expressed as a weight matrix, using log likelihoods, or information content, using the Kullback-Leibler divergence.

Even though the PFM is a convenient representation, it has certain limitations.
A PFM cannot model inter-nucleotide dependencies, that are known to affect
binding of certain TFs. Multiple different representations have been proposed
[@doi:10.1142/S0219720013400040; @doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003214; @doi:10.1093/nar/gkv577; @doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btw689; @doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005176],
however, no single one of these has gained much traction. Ultimately we
will need these types of advanced models to accurately represent TF binding. However, PFMs still serve as a useful abstraction that enables an intuitive understanding of TF binding.

Here, we present GimmeMotifs, a Python module and set of command-line tools for
TF motif analysis. Amongst other possibilities it can be used to perfom *de
novo* motif analysis, calculate enrichment statistics and identify differential
motifs between two or more experiments. We illustrate the functionality of GimmeMotifs using three different examples.
