# Findings

## Benchmark of transcription factor motif databases

A variety of transcription factor (TF) motif databases have been published based
on different data sources. One of the most established is JASPAR, which consists
of a collection of non-redundant, curated binding profiles
[@doi:10.1093/nar/gkx1126]. The JASPAR website contains many other tools and
the underlying databases are also accessible via an API
[@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btx804]. Other databases are based on protein
binding micorarrays [@doi:10.1093/nar/gku1045], HT-SELEX
[@doi:10.1101/gr.100552.109] or ChIP-seq profiles [@doi:10.1093/nar/gks1221;
@doi:10.1093/nar/gkt1249; @doi:10.1093/nar/gkx1106;
@doi:10.1016/j.molcel.2010.05.004]. CIS-BP integrates many individual motif
databases, and includes assignments of TFs to motifs bases based on DNA binding
domain homology [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2014.08.009].  

For the purpose of motif analysis, it is beneficial to have a database that is
non-redundant (i.e., similar motifs are grouped together), yet as complete as
possible (i.e., covers a wide variety of TFs). To establish a quantitative
measure of database quality, we evaluated how well motifs from different
databases can classify ChIP-seq peaks from background sequences using the GimmeMotifs tool `gimme roc`. We downloaded
ChIP-seq peaks from ReMap 2018 [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkx1092], and used all TFs with at least 1,000
peaks. We then evaluated 8 motif databases to test how well they could
distinguish peaks from random genomic sequences. When a data set contained more
than 5,000 peaks we randomly selected 5,000 peaks for the analysis. We included
the following databases: JASPAR 2018 vertebrate [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkx1126],
SwissRegulon [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkl857], Homer [@doi:10.1016/j.molcel.2010.05.004], Factorbook
[@doi:10.1093/nar/gks1221], the ENCODE motifs from Kheradpour et al.
[@doi:10.1093/nar/gkt1249], HOCOMOCO [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkx1106], the RSAT
clustered motifs [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkx314] and the motif database created by
Madsen et al.  [@doi:10.1101/gr.227231.117]. Figure 1A shows distribution of the
ROC AUC (area
under the curve for the Receiver Operator Curve) of the best motif per database
for all 294 transcription factors in a box plot. There is generally a wide
distribution of ROC AUCs. For some factors, such as ELK1, CTCF, CBFB and MYOD1,
peaks are relatively easy to classify using a single PFM motif. Other factors
don't have peaks with a consistently enriched motif, or do not contain a
sequence-specific DNA-binding domain, such as EP300 or CD2 for example.

![**Figure 1**: Benchmark of transcription factor motif databases. 
**A)** Motif-based classification of binding sites for 294 TFs from the ReMap ChIP-seq database. For all TFs 5000 peaks were compared to background regions using each motif database. The boxplot shows the The ROC AUC of the best motif per database for all TFs.
**B)** Recall at 10% FDR of motif databases compared to the GimmeMotifs vertebrate motif database (v4.0). The same data is used as in **A)**. The X-axis represents the recall for the different databases, the Y-axis represents the recall for the GimmeMotifs vertebrate database. Differences of more than 0.025 are marked blue, and less then -0.025 red. 
](content/images/figure_dbs.png)

The difference in maximum ROC AUC between databases is on average not very
large, with a mean maximum difference of 0.05. The largest difference (~0.24) is
found for factors that were not assayed by ENCODE, such as ONECUT1, SIX2 and
TP73, and are therefore not present in the Factorbook motif database.
Unsurprisingly, the databases that were based on motif collections of different
sources (Kheradpour, Madsen, RSAT and Gimme) generally perform best. It should
be noted that, for this task, using motif databases based on motif identification from
ChIP-seq peaks is in some sense "overfitting", as the motifs in these databases were inferred from highly similar data. 

While the ROC AUC is often used to compare the trade-off between sensitivity versus specificity, in this context it is not the best metric from a biological point of
view. An alternative way of measuring performance is evaluating the recall (ie.
how many true peaks do we recover) at a specific false discovery rate. This is
one of the criteria that has been used by the ENCODE DREAM challenge for
evaluation [@url:http://dreamchallenges.org/project/encode-dream-in-vivo-transcription-factor-binding-site-prediction-challenge/]. Figure 1B shows scatterplots for the recall at 10% FDR for
all motif databases compared to the clustered, non-redundant databases that is
included with GimmeMotifs. The non-redundant vertebrate motif database included with
GimmeMotifs shows better performance than most other databases. The
non-redundant RSAT database, which was created in a very similar manner, shows
similar performance.

These results illustrate how `gimme roc` can be used for evaluation of motifs.
The choice of a motif database can greatly influence the results of an analysis.
The default database included with GimmeMotifs shows good performance on the
metric evaluated here. However, this analysis illustrates only one specific use
case of application of a motif database. In other cases well-curated databases such
as JASPAR can be beneficial, for instance when linking motifs to binding
proteins. 

## Large-scale benchmark of *de novo* motif finder performance on ChIP-seq peaks

It has been noted that there is no *de novo* motif prediction
algorithm that consistently performs well across different data sets
[@doi:10.1038/nbt1053]. New approaches and algorithms for *de novo* motif
discovery continue to be published, however, many of them are not tested on more
than a few datasets. Benchmarks that have been published since Tompa et al.
[@doi:10.1186/s12859-016-1298-9;@doi:10.1093/nar/gki791]
typically have tested only a few motif finders or used only a few datasets.

Here, we used the GimmeMotifs framework as implemented in `gimme motifs` to benchmark 14 different *de novo*
motif finders. To evaluate the different approaches, we downloaded 495 peak
files for 270 proteins from ENCODE [@url:http://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/ensembl/encode/integration_data_jan2011/byDataType/peaks/jan2011/spp/optimal/hub/] and
selected the 100bp sequence centered on the summit of top 5000 peaks.  Of those
peaks, half were randomly selected as a prediction set and the other half was
used for evaluation. As a background set we selected regions of the same length
flanking the original peaks. To assess the performance, we calculated two
metrics, the ROC AUC and the recall at 10% FDR. Figure 2A shows the distribution
of the ROC AUC scores over all ENCODE peaks in a boxplot, ordered by the mean
ROC AUC. The ROC AUC is distributed between 0.58 and 0.98, with a mean of 0.75.
All proteins that have low ROC AUC are not sequence-specific transcription
factors such as POL2, TAF7 and GTF2B, the PRC2-subunit SUZ12 and the H3K9
methyltransferase SETDB1. The factors with the highest ROC AUC are CTCF and
members of the cohesin complex, SMC3 and RAD21, that bind at CTCF sites. 

![**Figure 2**: Benchmark of *de novo* motif finders. 
**A)** Comparison of the ROC AUC of the best motif of each motif finder. The
boxplot shows the best motif per peak set of 495 peaks for 270 proteins from
ENCODE. The best motif from all motif finders is indicated as 'Best'.
**B)** Comparison of the best motif per motif finder compared to the best
overall motif for each data set. Plotted is the difference in recall compared to
the best motif. Recall is calculated at 10% FDR.
**C)** The relative motif rank as a function of the motif quality. Rank is the
mean overall rank of three metrics (ROC AUC, recall at 10% FDR and MNCP).
](content/images/figure_denovo.png)

Generally, the ROC AUC distribution of all evaluated motif finders is very
similar. However, a few outliers can be observed. Trawler and Posmo show an overall lower distribution of ROC AUC scores.
Compared to the ROC AUC scores of the next best program, GADEM, this is
significant (p < 0.01, Wilcoxon signed-rank). Selecting the best motif for each
experiment results in a ROC AUC distribution that is significantly higher than
the best single method, BioProspector (p < 1e-21, Wilcoxon signed-rank).

As stated in the previous section, the ROC AUC is not the best measure to
evaluate motif quality. Therefore, we selected for every peak set the best motif
from all motifs predicted by the different motif finders on the basis of the
recall at 10% FDR. We then plotted the difference between the best motif from
each individual *de novo* approach with this best overall motif (Fig. 2B). For
this figure, we used only the data sets where at least one motif had a recall
higher than 0 at 10% FDR. 

In line with previous results [@doi:10.1038/nbt1053], there is no single tool that
consistently predicts the best motif for each transcription factor. However, the
motifs predicted by BioProspector, MEME and Homer are, on basis of this metric,
consistently better than motifs predicted by other methods. In 75% of the cases,
the motif predicted by BioProspector has a difference in recall smaller than
0.026 compared to the best overall motif. In this benchmark, four programs
(Trawler, Improbizer, Posmo and Weeder) generally perform worse than average,
with a mean decrease in recall of 0.11 to 0.17, as compared to the best motif.
In addition, these programs tend to have a much more variable performance
overall.

Predicted motifs identified using MEME with different motif widths show better performance than
running MEME with the `minw` and `maxw` options (MEME vs. MEMEW in Fig. 2B). Of
the best performing algorithms, both MEME and BioProspector were not
specifically developed for ChIP-seq data, however, they consistently outperform
most methods created for ChIP-seq data. Of the ChIP-seq motif finders Homer
consistently shows good performance.

Finally, to gain further insight into *de novo* motif finder performance, we
stratified the ChIP-seq datasets by motif "quality". We divided the
transcription factors into five bins on basis of the ROC AUC score of the best
motif. For each bin we ranked the tools on basis of the average of three metrics
(ROC AUC, recall at 10% FDR and MNCP [@pmid:12538241]). The results are visualized as a
heatmap in Figure 2C. From this visualization, it is again clear that
BioProspector, MEME and Homer produce consistently high-ranking motifs, while
the motifs identified by Trawler, Posmo, GADEM and Improbizer generally have the
lowest rank. Interestingly, for some motif finders, there is a relation between
motif presence and the relative rank. Weeder, XXMotif and MDmodule yield
relatively high-ranking motifs when the ROC AUC of the best motif for the data
set is low. On the other hand, ChIPMunk shows the opposite pattern. Apparently
this algorithm works well when a motif is present in a significant fraction of the
data set.

These results illustrate that motif finders need to be evaluated along a broad range of
data sets with different motif presence and quality. Another interesting
observation is that this ChIP-seq benchmark shows a lower-than-average
performance for Weeder, which actually was one of the highest scoring in the
Tompa et al. benchmark.  It should be noted that our metric specifically
evaluates how well *de novo* motif finders identify the primary motif in the
context of ChIP-seq peaks. It does not evaluate other aspects that might be
important, such as the ability to identify many low-abundant motifs.
Furthermore, with ChIP-seq data there are usually thousands of peaks available. This
allows for other algorithms than those that work well on a few sequences.
Interestingly, the original MEME shows consistently good performance, although
the running time is longer than most other tools.  On the basis of this
analysis, BioProspector should be the top pick for a program to identify primary
motifs in ChIP-seq data. However, an ensemble program such as GimmeMotifs will
report high-quality motifs more consistently than any single tool.


## Differential motif analysis of hematopoietic enhancers identifies cell type-specific regulators

While many motif scanners and methods to calculate enrichment exist, there are few
methods to compare motif enrichment or activity between two or more data
sets. The CentriMo algorithm from the MEME suite implements a differential
enrichment method to compare two samples [@doi:10.1186/1471-2164-15-752]. Other approaches, such as MARA [@doi:10.1038/ng.375;@doi:10.1101/gr.169508.113] and IMAGE [10.1101/gr.227231.117], are based on linear regression. Here we present the *maelstrom* algorithm that integrates different
methods to determine motif relevance or activity in an ensemble approach (Fig.
3A).

To demonstrate the utility of maelstrom we identified motif activity based on
enhancers in hematopoietic cells. We downloaded 69 human hematopoietic DNaseI
experiments (Supplementary Table S1), called peaks, and created a combined peak
set as a collection of putative enhancers. In addition we downloaded 193
hematopoietic H3K27ac ChIP-seq experiments, mainly from BLUEPRINT
[@doi:10.3324/haematol.2013.094243] (Supplementary Table S1). We determined the number of H3K27ac reads per
enhancer (Supplementary Table S2). After log2 transformation and scaling, we selected the 50,000 most
dynamic peaks. Figure 3B shows the correlation of the H3K27ac enrichment in
these 50,000 enhancers between cell types. For this plot, replicates were
combined by taking the mean value and all experiments corresponding to treated
cells were removed. We can observe five main clusters 1) non-hematopoietic
cells, megakaryocyte and erothrocytes 2), lymphoid cells, 3) neutrophilic cells,
4) macrophages and dendritic cells and 5) monocytes. The lymphoid cluster furthermore seperates between B-cells and T- and NK cells and non-hematopoietic cells are distinct from the megakaryocytes and erythroblasts. We can conclude that the H3K27ac profile within this enhancers set recapitulates a cell type-spefific regulatory signal.

![**Figure 3**: Predicting TF motif activity using maelstrom.
**A)** An overview of the *maelstrom* ensemble method.
**B)** Heatmap of the correlation of H3K27ac signal in hematopoietic enhancers. We counted H3K27ac ChIP-seq reads in 2kb sequences centered at DNase I peaks. Counts were log2-transformed and scaled and replicates were combined by taking the mean value. This heatmap shows the Pearson r, calculated using the 50,000 most dynamic peaks.
**C)** Results of running `gimme maelstrom` on the 50,000 most dynamic hematopoietic enhancers. The reported motifs activity represents log10-transformed p-value of the rank aggregation. For high-ranking motifs -log10(p-value) is shown.
](content/images/figure_blueprint.png)

To determine differential motif activity from these dynamic enhancers we used
maelstrom. We combined Bayesian ridge regression, multi-class regression using
coordinate descent [@doi:10.1007/s10994-013-5367-2] and regression with boosted trees [@doi:10.1145/2939672.2939785].
The coefficients or feature importances were ranked and combined using rank
aggregation [@doi:10.1038/nbt1203]. A p-value was calculated for consistently high ranking and
consistently low ranking motifs. The results are visualized in Figure 3C. 

Two of the most signicant motifs are SPI1 (PU.1) and CEBP. The motif activity
for SPI1 is high in monocytes and macrophages, consistent with its
role in myeloid lineage commitment [@pmid:9694804]. The CEBP family members are important for monocytes and granulocitic cells [@doi:10.1038/sj.onc.1210764], and show a high motif activity in neutrophils and monocytes. Other strong motifs include RUNX for T cells and NK cells, GATA1 for erythroid cells. 

We identified a strong activity for motifs representing the ZEB1 and Snail
transcription factors. The Snail transcription factors play an important role in
the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), and their role in hematopoietic
cells is less well-described. However, recently Snai2 and Snai3 were found to be
required to generate mature T and B cells [@doi:10.1016/j.cellimm.2015.02.009;@doi:10.1016/j.imbio.2016.01.007] in mice. ZEB1
is expressed in T cells and represses expression of IL-2 [@doi:10.1093/intimm/dxn143], as well as
other immune genes such as CD4 [@pmid:10508188] and GATA3 [@pmid:10037751]. ZEB1
knockout mice exhibit a defect in thymocyte development [@pmid:9389660]. Together,
this suggests that these TFs play an important role in lymphocyte development. 

Finally, an interesting observation is the predicted motif activity of NANOG in
endothelial cells. NANOG is expressed in embryonic stem cells and is essential
for maintenance of pluripotency [@doi:10.1038/sj.cr.7310125]. However, NANOG is
indeed also  expressed in endothelial cells and has been shown to play a role in
endothelial proliferation and angiogenesis [@doi:10.1182/blood-2010-07-295261].
