# Conclusions

We demonstrated the functionality of GimmeMotifs with three examples. First, to
evaluate different public motif databases, we quantified their performance on
distinguishing ChIP-seq peaks from background sequences. The databases that
perform best on this benchmark are collections of motifs from different
sources. Of the individual databases HOCOMOCO and Factorbook rank highest
using this collection of human ChIP-seq peaks. Based on our results it is
recommended to use a composite database, such as the RSAT clustered motifs or
the GimmeMotifs database (v4.0), for the best vertebrate motif coverage. However,
these motifs are less well annotated. For instance, motifs based on ChIP-seq
peaks from some sources might be from co-factors or cell type-specific
regulators instead of the factor that was assayed. An example are motifs that
associated with the histone acetyl tranferase EP300. This transcriptional
co-activator lacks a DNA binding domain, and associated motifs depend on the
cell type. For instance, in a lymphoblastoid cell line such as GM12878 these
include PU.1 and AP1. The lack of high-quality annotation makes it more
difficult to reliably link motifs to transcription factors. This can be an
advantage of using JASPAR. Although the motifs might not be optimal, JASPAR
contains high-quality metadata that is manually curated.  

In the second example, we benchmarked 14 different *de novo* motif finders
using a large compendium of ChIP-seq data. While performance can vary between
different data sets, there are several *de novo* motif finders that
consistently perform well, with BioProspector, MEME and Homer as top
performers. Interestingly, only Homer was specifically developed for ChIP-seq
data. An ensemble approach such as GimmeMotifs still improves on the use of
individual tools. This example also illustrates that newly developed *de novo*
motif finders should be evaluated on many different data sets, as this is
necessary to accurately judge the performance. 

Finally, we presented a new ensemble approach, *maelstrom*, to
determine motif activity in two or more epigenomic or transcriptomic data
sets. Using H3K27ac ChIP-seq signal as a measure for enhancer activity, we
analyzed cell-type specific motif activity in a large collection of
hematopoietic cell types. We identified known lineage regulators, as well as
motifs for factors that are less well studied in a hematopoietic context.
This illustrates how `gimme maelstrom` can serve to identify cell type-specific
transcription factors.

In conclusion, GimmeMotifs is a flexible and highly versatile framework for
transcription factor motif analysis. Both command line and programmatic use in
Python are supported. One planned future improvement to GimmeMotifs is the
support of more sophisticated motif models. Although PFMs are very informative,
it is clear that they represent an oversimplification of TF binding preferences. While
several approaches that incorporate positional dependencies have been
developed, it is still unclear how well these models perform and their use
depends on specific tools. Supporting these different models and benchmarking
their performance relative to high-quality PFMs will simplify their use and
give insight into their benefits and disadvantages.  Second, there is significant progress recently 
in modeling TF binding using deep neural networks (DNNs) [@doi:10.1038/nmeth.3547;@doi:10.1101/gr.227819.117]. These
DNNs can learn sequence motifs, as well as complex inter-dependencies, directly
from the data. However, while biological interpretation is possible [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bty575], it becomes less straightforward. We expect that analyzing and understanding a trained DNN can
benefit from high-quality motif databases and comparative tools such as
GimmeMotifs. 

# Availability and requirements

* Project name: GimmeMotifs
* Project home page: https://github.com/simonvh/gimmemotifs
* Operating system(s): Linux, Mac OSX
* Programming language: Python 3 
* Other requirements: *de novo* motif finders
* License: MIT

# Availability of supporting data

# Additional files

# Competing interests

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

# Funding

SJvH was supported by the Netherlands Organization for Scientific research
(NWO-ALW, grant 863.12.002). Part of this work was carried out on the Dutch
national e-infrastructure with the support of SURF Foundation. This work was
sponsored by NWO Exact and Natural Sciences for the use of supercomputer
facilities.

# Acknowledgements

